---
layout: post
title: "Beyond Courses, Dissertations, and Exams"
subtitle: "connecting my math graduate school experience and career"
header-img: "img/math-bg.png"
date: 2023-04-24 18:00:00
---

On April 25 I'm giving a talk at Auburn University's Department
of Mathematics and Statistics graduate student seminar.
My alma mater invited me to share about my experiences in grad
school, and how it prepared me for my academic career.

I'm writing the below in a bit more generality, in case it's
maybe useful for other graduate students looking ahead to life 
after the defense.

*Note: it's looking like I won't have time to complete this
post before my talk, so I'll finish writing everything
up as soon as I can this week.*

## The basic stuff

I arrived at Auburn in 2004 as a freshman, and left with my PhD
in 2015. This is *not* a strategy I usually advise, but between
my personal and academic interests, I think it wasn't unreasonable
for my own situation.

While in graduate school, I kept a 4.0 GPA. I think this has
been mentioned exactly once ever since in a professional setting.
Completing courses is
obviously important, and I'm sure the respect I earned from
my faculty mentors corollated with these good grades, but I do
regret the stress I put on myself at times worrying about them
along the way.

While a Master's student (originally both in math and math education,
though I quickly dropped the latter) I completed the three preliminary
exams required of PhD students: topology, graph theory, and complex
analysis. I knew I wanted to study topology or graph theory, so choosing
those was easy. I don't remember why I picked complex for the third
(maybe purely based on scheduling), but I do remember having to
relearn most of it five or so years later when I was assigned to teach an
undergraduate section at South.

When I was a graduate student, "topology" meant "set theoretic topology
and maybe some continuum theory" to me. I'm not sure that's a perspective that's even
possible almost anywhere besides Auburn. While most researchers I've met seem to view
first-semester graduate topology as the details you slog through so you can enjoy
the geometric/algebraic/low-dimensional stuff, I loved the word puzzles
and technicalities and counterexamples one needs to dream up to define a
[$T_2$ but not regular space](https://topology.pi-base.org/spaces?q=%24T_2%24%2B~Regular),
and Auburn has some great faculty working in this space.
It wasn't until I was looking at the job market that I realized how niche
my area of focus was. I'm not sure if knowing this earlier would have changed
my mind at the time, but I definitely tell this upfront to graduate
students who want  work with me at South. I've mentored one Master's student
and [co-authored a nice paper with them](https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.01845),
but they now are in a PhD program studying graph theory at UC Denver.

Ultimately (and perhaps expectedly), my dissertation, directed by Gary Gruenhage,
was by far the most important artifact of my required activities as a graduate student.
As one does, I spent two or three years playing it out into a handful of my initial publications.
I remember being quite nervous about how I'd advance my scholarship without having my
regular meetings with Gary. It took me longer than it should have to figure out the trick:
you probably *won't* be very productive working without mentors or collaborators.
While I had lots of friends and collaborators (on non-research projects) during graduate
school, I wish that part of my graduate experience involved working directly with other
students on research, so I could have learned earlier how to work with colleagues
rather than just my major professor.

## The extra stuff

While there's no way I could have paid my own way through
graduate school, being a graduate teaching assistant / instructor
isn't strictly required to earn your PhD. That said, developing
myself as an educator was at least as important as developing
my research program. I'm at an R2 university where TT/tenured
faculty generally have a 50-40-10 split: 50% teaching,
40% research, and 10% service. So while there's theoretically
an equal balance of research and teaching, the quality of
my work in the classroom is way more obvious to my colleagues
and supervisors than my research.

So if you want to be a professor,
don't sleep on the importance of being a good instructor!
Generally PhD graduates do not move laterally in their careers,
so graduating from a state school R1 means you're more likely
to end up at a teaching-focused small liberal arts college than
a research-focused university. And thinking of my own institution,
while your in-person interview for a tenure-track position
may focus mostly on your research, you won't get that interview
without evidence on
paper that you'll be able to manage our 9+6 credit hour
annual teaching load with primarily non-math STEM majors.
So reach out now to your institution's
Center for Teaching and Learning to find what support they offer
graduate students, and look for professional development opportunities
such as workshops and conferences that can help you
enhance your classroom skillset.

Since I arrived at South, I've deliberately not stepped up to
run for Faculty Senate. Which is admittedly a bit selfish (and now
that I have the security of tenure, I should reevaluate that decision).
But I picked up on the importance of governance within academia as
a graduate student, because I served as a department Senator,
and later President of Auburn's Graduate Student Council. Beauracracy
is a reality of any non-trivial organization, and that goes double
for a university. And while I haven't run for office, I have made a point
to develop working relationships with several administrators
across various units on campus, which has been quite useful in finding solutions
to problems related to some of my more unique scholarly projects.

I mentioned that 10% service, but I can promise you that in terms of
actual time, I spend more than 4 hours a week on it. Service encompasses
a wide variety of activities, but some of the most fulfilling are
related to outreach. I was spoiled at Auburn due to the excellent staff
of COSAM Outreach: as a faculty member I have to handle all aspects of
an outreach event, but as a graduate student I could focus on the
mathematical activities themselves, while COSAM Outreach handled the
logistics. So take time to volunteer with outreach events, and learn how
to connect general audiences with mathematics, before you're also
responsible for arranging the parking passes and catering.

## The wacky stuff

In this section I'm going to dive into a couple major projects I took
on during graduate school that probably generalize poorly to others.
But I mention them because while it was unclear how they'd impact my
future career, as we'll see, they did. So don't avoid the wacky stuff:
enjoy your hobbies, and don't be afraid to pick up a side hustle.
You never know how they might pay out down the road...

When I was a graduate student, I was fortunate that
[Eric Harshbarger](http://www.ericharshbarger.org/) was still
organizing his annual "Puzzle Parties". These games are akin to
a city-wide escape room: teams of players would tackle dozens of
puzzles in as many hours, each solving to a location hidden across
campus.. (TODO: Puzzlehunts and AMP'd)

TODO: Teloga, LLC

## TODO: What's happening now?

TBIL

pi-Base and AIM Workshop

MaPP, AMS Notices

PROSE
